---
layout: post
title: The Importance of Play Based Activities
categories: [Toddler Activities]
tags: [toddler, play]
image:
  feature: 
  teaser: 
  credit: Laurin Brainard
  creditlink: ""
---
Play is a child’s most favorite word, and it’s what their world consists of. But, play is more than just fun, it’s a huge part of a child’s development. We all know the importance of play, but despite knowing that, a lot of times we still don’t associate it with learning. But why? Play is how our children learn, it has a purpose and it’s how they learn to process the world around them. We can encourage it by providing them with opportunities for imaginative play. Giving the materials and letting your child explore inspires them to pretend, create and imagine. Pretend play in the kitchen, digging in the dirt, and building big big towers with their favorite blocks are just a few of the ways our kids learn! Unstructured, imaginative play teaches kids especially preschoolers about cause and effect, social expectations and builds a foundation for social interaction. As a parent and teacher, I know we put stress on ourselves to make sure that our kids are constantly learning. But, unstructured play is learning! I am being honest here when I say there is no strategy behind it and adults can provide the materials but do not need to give direction. That is the best part about it, it’s child-led and simply meant to be FUN! So, how can we do this for our children? Set them up with materials and let them go! Sensory bins are amazing for engaging those teeny tiny fine motor skills but also imaginative play happens there too. Giving a child a bin of water with measuring cups with no direction can become a kitchen where they are cooking which is testing their planning and critical thinking skills. When we allow littles to be in charge of their learning we are giving them the chance to engage all of their senses. As parents, we also play a crucial role by asking questions that provoke their learning. Asking them why encourages them to have conversations about their play. Using play encourages communication skills, motor development, social-emotional development, and the enhancement of a child’s imagination. You can provide the materials and let your child set the stage of what they want to create with their own imagination. I love watching my kids build an ice cream shop from dirt and buckets when we are playing out in the backyard, they are working on those social skills by taking turns and making decisions with one another. Unstructured play gives young kids a chance to develop freedom and control of their decisions, helps them to explore likes and dislikes about themselves. Children need to have opportunities to explore, create and discover without specific expectations. The benefits are endless, it is playing with purpose and I bet you will be surprised with some of the things your kiddos can come up with. They may be little but they have big imaginations!!!! 